welcome to topcast for an episode i'm
titling probability
risk rationality and reality now i know
this is an esoteric channel but even for
me this is an esoteric episode i'm not
discussing a book or primarily a written
piece at all i'm discussing a video
lecture a talk by david deutsch it is
his ted talks aside perhaps my favorite
of his public talks now the reason i am
doing this is that i just do not
understand why it this talk that i'm
talking about has not made more waves i
think it should get more traction so in
this episode what i'm doing is providing
my take on david's lecture i emphasize
that this is my take because as i like
to say errors are my own and i expect to
have made mistakes in understanding or
misunderstanding what david has said in
his lecture let me in another way say
for the third time
these are my words if i directly quote
david i will say so i don't expect to
except where i've provided a literal
clip of him speaking i might get close
some sometimes to using his exact words
but i'm belaboring this point because i
have added quite a bit of personally
indulgent accoutrement we might say
window dressing and emphasis and maybe
some topspin just because i find it fun
so in other words this is all inspired
by david's talk i certainly cannot say
endorsed by him in any way if you want
david's words go directly to his lecture
and double check there that what i say
is representing what he says before i
don't know you decide to start tweeting
or emailing him dear professor deutsch i
heard brett hall claim that you client
and so on okay we don't want that i am
making those such claims i am
summarizing ideas and my summary is my
own not david's so blame me for the
mistakes now i'm also going to augment
what i am saying here today with
primarily a paper called the constructor
theory of probability by kiara marletto
now why am i bothering with all this
well the main reason is the main reason
i do any of this just because i want to
i find it fun to try and understand
these ideas more deeply because at first
they are always counterintuitive and
then after spending some time trying to
understand them rather than thinking
well that can't work because of reason x
well that contradicts what i've known
since primary school so i'll just reject
that outright and so on after taking the
time to really digest ideas like this
one that i'm going to present today and
meditate on these ideas so to speak you
end up thinking
how could it be otherwise this is one of
those cases and that process is fun so
that's the first reason i'm doing any of
this the second reason is that as some
listeners are aware i'm in the midst of
completing a series on stephen pinker's
book called rationality now in that book
he devotes entire chapters to
probability basically half the book is
devoted to trying to explain how
important probability theory is to
rationality chapter four is called
probability and randomness chapter five
beliefs and evidence subtitled bayesian
reasoning which is just probability as
applied to a false epistemology and
chapter six is risk and reward more
probability and chapter seven is
decision theory using probability among
other things to make decisions chapter
nine is correlation and causation which
is all capped in terms of you guessed it
statistics and probability now i'm not
just fixated on stephen pinker pinker as
a thinker is not the issue it is what
his book rationality represents it is
emblematic of the can i underline
boldface and italicize that the way in
which rationality how to think how to
reason is seen by academia it is how
people are schooled in this insofar as
they take an interest pinker's book
represents that world view
i'm interested in misconceptions of that
world view misconceptions of that kind
that pinker explains
the ones that are so deeply a part of
culture they are formalized into courses
and passed on generation after
generation now admittedly there is an
asymmetry lurking here a book like
rationality is summarizing what is the
inherited wisdom false though it is in
places of the expert class it is not
trying to illuminate a new and better
way
the work of david deutch on the other
hand is trying to do something different
it is what i would say the cutting edge
of reason and science so it is
unsurprising there is conflict in places
or sometimes just tension in my series
on pinkus book i should emphasize i'm
not doing much more than encouraging
people to purchase it i think it is
worth the price there is good stuff in
there but equally there are
misconceptions and those misconceptions
are indeed misconceptions which only a
small number of people are aware are
actually misconceptions the rest of them
think well this is the best way of
thinking this is the gold standard being
explained here but we think there's
another standard there's a platinum
standard that's another way of thinking
about rationality better than what is
explained in that book titled
rationality because what we're going to
talk about today is new very new and to
begin to understand it takes our best
epistemology as well as our best physics
in short it takes us taking realism
seriously we want to know what reality
is really like we don't just want to
make use of useful fictions as
instruments to help us predict stuff
sure sometimes that is useful the ideal
gas law used in chemistry and physics
fails for many reasons but among other
things it assumes let's say molecules
have no forces between them but as a
rough and ready estimate it will do in
many situations it's better than a
random guess but it doesn't represent
reality what is really going on with
gases gases aren't ideal so too with
probability as we're about to find out
similarly any calculation involving
classical mechanics of the relative
velocity of two objects by ignoring
relativistic effects or any calculation
of the distance to a star that doesn't
involve parallax
these things are only
approximations to reality rather than
trying to provide a literal explanation
of reality our best understanding of
reality at a particular time science is
of course replete with useful fictions
but none of them are good explanations
once we know where exactly they're false
they are not literal accounts of reality
once we know they are false and how they
are false in science we basically have
once good explanations now known to be
false and explanations yet to be shown
false as always by way of illustration
on that i'm going to use newtonian
gravity in the former category a once
upon a time good explanation but which
we now know to be false and in the
latter category we have general
relativity a good explanation of gravity
of space and time
yet to be shown false and that
brings us today to probability
probability purports to be a scientific
theory of a kind it seeks to explain
what is going on in the real physical
world so you take a so-called fair coin
and you toss it and the probability it
comes up heads is so we are told one in
two fifty percent that's the science of
coin tosses fifty percent of the time it
will be heads and fifty percent of the
time it will be tails in the real world
except of course it almost never is
just try it yourself try a large number
of coin tosses more than a hundred it
only approximately is one and two it's
only approximately fifty percent of the
time exactly fifty percent heads indeed
tossing a real coin a thousand times one
should not expect precisely 500 heads
only approximately 500 heads but why
well so the theory goes if you could
toss it an infinite number of times then
in the limit we are told the number of
heads would approach 50
but then we've left the real world we've
left science because we can't toss a
coin an infinite number of times
infinite coin tosses are not science
actual scientific theories actual
theories of physics purport to be actual
explanations of the real world of what
happens in the physical world the world
being everything in physical existence
but if the actual explanation almost
never accurately models what is going on
then what is going on well some might
argue it's true a priori it's an
idealized mathematical model well once
more that's not physics exactly then is
it it's pure mathematics again what is
going on if not the precise
probabilities suggested by the
probability calculus for something as
simple as a coin toss
well we'll get there don't worry but
before we do just a few more remarks
about probability and mathematics
generally in terms of the broader
sociological phenomena
in the general educated populace
mathematical ability or knowledge or
whatever you want to call it serves as a
proxy for intelligence rather often
according to some anyway
but in academia itself this often isn't
enough
you do see what appears to be an
academic litmus test used on fellow
members of the intelligentsia and that
litmus test isn't as broad as
mathematical proficiency in general it's
statistics and probability it's not how
good were your calculus scores or how
far along in geometry did you get have
you completed any topology courses yet
no the measure of mathematical
proficiency often is probability and
statistics
you see it iconoclasts on social media
twitter is where i notice it most
obviously one great mind berating
another for not knowing enough
probability or not having a good enough
grip of it or having bad intuitions on
that front the probability front and
haven't we all felt chastised at some
point or another by some media outlet
where each time a terror attack happens
some pundit has to point out you've more
chance of being hit by lightning than by
being blown up by a jihadis bomb we all
just have bad intuitions about risk we
are told of course never mind that
terrorist bombs going off have behind
them sets of bad ideas while lightning
strikes are not so motivated there's the
matter of intent to contend with and
intense can be changed which makes a
world of difference in these cases they
are not the same kind of thing because
mitigating them does not come down to
the same kind of thing precisely so of
course that talk of comparative risk
when it comes to terror incidents versus
plain old tragic accidents is to avoid
any discussion about the causes and
perpetrators of terror attacks motivated
reasoning some might call it or holding
certain ideas immune from criticism
others might say and just on that i
think that example contains within it so
much information that is readily
portable to so many other examples where
probability is misused
the idea here is that with terrorism or
even with lightning strikes for that
matter there exists good explanations
for why they happen and in many cases
where if not when and to who and by whom
that helps people assess risk and
prepare for it and mitigate it the
information that you an individual
living in new york or london or sydney
have a 1 in 1.6 million chance of being
killed by a terror attack is almost
contentless not all new yorkers
londoners or sydney siders have the same
risk some barely leave home compared to
others who travel via underground public
transport to high-rise office blocks
even then there exists differences
between different places in the same
city
the idea that you have a 1 in 500 000
chance of dying of a lightning strike is
contentless too it doesn't help however
knowing not to be outside during
thunderstorms carrying umbrellas or
standing on the roof of a high rise well
those things do reduce your risk the
statistic of 1 in 500 000 deaths each
year for the last 10 years from
lightning strikes is not a probability
of your future chance of death if it
comforts you maybe if you knew nothing
else you'd think well that's almost zero
so who cares about flying a kite in the
park during a thunderstorm by the way
these statistics on terror and lightning
strikes are from the cdc in the united
states where you can look up all sorts
of supposed chances of dying
but again you might not be typical there
are many interpretations of probability
it's rather like interpretations of
quantum theory or so-called
interpretations of quantum theory and
here like there i am not interested in
refuting all of those false
interpretations
in either case i just want to summarize
a realistic conception of here
probability when i say realistic what i
mean is actually conforms to what we
know of physics physics constrains what
we can know of mathematics and when it
comes to probability people want to
apply it to the real physical world so
we're going to take that claim seriously
can we do it can we apply probability to
the real world and get accurate
predictions and to what extent this is
what david's talk is about you can find
it online by searching youtube with the
keywords david deutsch probability it
should come up
now the talk is called
physics without probability but i've
always found that a little misleading
because it is far more wide-ranging than
that i'll link to the talk itself in the
descriptions to this podcast and i
accept it's quite fair to ask if that
talk's already out there why am i
talking about a talk well again just to
unpack these very new ideas in a
slightly different language and maybe it
will inspire some to go to the original
source material which is very much worth
the time so let's begin and throughout
this unpacking of david's talk i'm going
to be stealing with his permission the
slides that were used in his talk david
deutsch as listeners will know as almost
all listeners will know is a pioneer in
quantum information theory he's
interested in drilling down to the
foundations of what we know what are the
absolute fundamentals that underlie
everything else there's an irony here
because david deutch is simultaneously
someone who denies there are actual
foundations so he's looking at
foundations and denying they are there
well
not quite what this all means is that he
looks at the deepest knowledge we have
so far and he tries to go deeper he just
does not think like so many others who
work in this area or people who are
interested in the philosophy of this
that once you have found the deepest
knowledge hitherto
that this is where progress stops it's
rather the opposite
anywhere at all is a place to make
progress and he chooses digging ever
deeper beneath what we already know
quantum computation goes further than
regular quantum theory it goes deeper it
goes deeper than quantum theory it goes
deeper than regular computation and now
david has generalized gone deeper than
quantum computation the field that he
began by creating constructor theory
creating or discovering if you like his
theory of physics constructor theory
goes beyond laws and initial conditions
the way physics until now has always
been done and the consequence of
constructive theory is the notion that
things either can happen or cannot
happen they do not probably happen we'll
keep coming back to this very notion but
the point for now is that constructor
theory showed that probability can be
removed from our vision of reality this
is not all it does but for our purposes
today
that is what it does do constructor
theory as david says is a mode of
explanation a new mode of explanation
probability is a mode of explanation the
initial conditions and laws of physics
are a mode of explanation david lists
more here on this slide these modes of
explanations are ways of understanding
the world ways of explaining things the
initial conditions and laws of motion
thing is where you have some dynamical
law and you plug in certain conditions
they could be the conditions at the
beginning of time the conditions at some
time x or the conditions sometime in the
future and you can postdict or predict
what is going to happen the other ones
listed there include things like well
emergent laws the laws of thermodynamics
we've got things there like variation
selection in other words evolutionary
principle the theory of evolution by
natural selection darwinism anthropic
selection this idea that human beings
exist so therefore what follows about
the universe especially the laws of the
universe or we could explain things in
terms of human creativity in other words
what happens out there in reality is due
to people making choices people creating
stuff people coming to generate
knowledge particularly explanatory
knowledge so these are the modes of
explanation that david refers to and
they are ways of explaining what happens
in the world each of them purport to be
about reality
actually what's physically going on and
why
so today we're looking carefully at
what's in red there can things in
reality be predicted which in this case
includes explained by recourse to
probability we are taking this seriously
and literally as a description of
reality as proponents of probability
often do and by the way constructor
theory seeks to go deeper than all of
these existing modes of explanation
it will see any of them to the extent
they are valid at all to be
approximations to it but false in the
final analysis it will explain why they
superficially perhaps appear to be
plausible why they appear to work in
some narrow domain and why they end up
failing explanation in the constructor
theoretic mode is via the dichotomy
between transformations that are either
possible or impossible and we can see
here the slide of the first principle of
constructor theory which says
all other laws of physics are
expressible entirely in terms of
statements about which physical
transformations it is possible to bring
about reliably and which are impossible
and why by the way
possible here means following kiara's
paper that quote a task being possible
in this sense means that it could be
performed with arbitrarily high accuracy
not that it will happen with non-zero
probability end quote an approximation
is not a literal description of reality
it is closer to a metaphor
newtonian mechanics we know is no longer
an actual description of reality there
is no force of gravity there is no
action at a distance there is no
universal time ticking away for all of
the universe some of the very things
therefore referred to as existing by
that theory don't exist at best newton's
mechanics is a low velocity low mass
approximation that can provide a much
better than random guess estimation of
some physical quantities under some
conditions some of the time
useful for building houses and aiming
rockets and so on but as soon as you're
near a massive star or moving closer to
the speed of light operating particle
accelerators and so on it fails to work
only relativity or in other
circumstances quantum theory provide the
actual answer without correction in
physics because we can take them
literally as descriptions of reality and
as far as we know they are but
probability is not like relativity or
quantum theory it is not accurate to the
limits of our measuring devices it does
not survive all tests we've already seen
that real life experiments with flipping
coins or rolling dice almost never match
what the probability calculus says
they only approximately do but if that's
not a falsification then by that measure
eddington's test failed to falsify
newtonian gravity of course in that case
we had two theories to choose between
here what are our choices well the
choices are rationality which includes
relying on quantum theory as it
realistically is where we discuss what
actually happens in reality and
apparently probability which is more
about all those things that might have
happened in reality but did not and the
tiny proportion of things that did
happen which is overkill when you think
about it probability is at best an
approximation although an approximation
to what we might wonder in short there
is no place for probability at the
foundations of physics and as david says
in his talk he doesn't make the case
against probability from constructor
theory he doesn't need to because
independent of constructor theory the
world is not probabilistic
that's just an illusion
probability theory is like the flat
earth theory it's useful perhaps for
gardening but if you are thinking about
what the laws of nature are then false
theories are an impediment to
understanding reality let's pause there
for a moment reflect and say that all
over again
if you are thinking about what the laws
of nature are then false theories are an
impediment to understanding reality
probability was invented by people in
the 16th century like cardano who wanted
to win in games of chance and this began
the mathematical field known as game
theory
probability is supposed to be a
mathematical model for the intuitive
idea that certain things are fair like
dice and card shuffling and so on but
the originators of that theory did not
think the physical objects literally had
the properties of fairness and literal
randomness
they seemed to understand that the
perfect idealization of dice and card
shuffling were not like actual physical
dice and card shuffling cardano and his
contemporaries in other words did not
assume games of chance were stochastic
processes a stochastic process is a
literally random one one governed not by
deterministic laws of nature as we
usually understand them or as they were
understood at that time even now this
was of course before newtonian physics
this pre-newtonian idea being basically
aristotle's there were deterministic
laws even if they were not well
understood whatever the case games of
chance did not literally have the
properties of actual randomness that the
probability calculus requires it would
never have occurred to them the creators
of probability to connect physics to
probability because the former physics
was deterministic not random probability
was used because in a sense it was too
strong it assumed literal randomness
where they thought things were perhaps
seemingly only approximately so and in
that sense probability is a mathematical
trick the reason game theory is possible
at all was that its conclusions do not
depend on physics in the real world in
the end the theory of probability in
truth was about modeling human social
behavior of a certain kind namely
playing certain games playing cards
rolling dice flipping coins these are
things people do for entertainment
perhaps to earn money sometimes they are
not features of the natural environment
outside human societies this
mathematical trick about human social
games nonetheless has found applications
in diverse fields as if it's fundamental
in them
david lists them roughly in historic
order here and throughout his talk he
just goes through one by one redlining
them putting a red line straight through
them as he refutes the use of
probability in each of them when taken
seriously as a literal description of
reality so what we've got there is
probability apparently being used in the
theory of experimental errors this is
basically experimental errors in in
science come down to two kinds
systematic and random i'll come back to
those towards the end actuarial sciences
listed there next this is where we look
at risk the risk of an investment or
return or the chance of a disaster or
whether and to what extent some customer
is worth ensuring or lending to and i'll
come back to this idea about risk at the
end and just give some remarks about
this people have asked me over the years
to do an episode on how to interpret
risk using a critical rationalist
framework okay having the idea having
papillion epistemology how do we think
about risk well i'm going to do that
today towards the end of today's episode
biology is listed there evolution by
random variation and natural selection
is that truly random does it need to be
probabilistic does it need to be random
the foundations of classical and quantum
statistical mechanics principles of
equal a priori probability brownian
motion this this was studied by einstein
in one of his first papers it's where
you have particles suspended in a liquid
for example a colloid is one kind and
those usually solid particles are
jostled around in the liquid by the
motion of the molecules usually water
molecules and that motion seems to be
random next we've got listed there the
quantum theory the bourne rule we're
going to come to that presently general
decision theory how to make decisions
based on probability when you think that
things only probably might happen
information theory classical then
quantum bayesian philosophy of science
here's where we aim to increase our
credences which are supposedly
probabilities and last of all the
pricing of derivative securities using
the black shoals equation the attempt to
try and predict what is going to happen
in the stock market the motivation for
removing probability from all of those
areas is just like the motivation for
removing the celestial sphere from
cosmology and the force of gravity from
physics and elsewhere for that matter in
the process we explain why it has been
and remains a useful fiction it can be
useful to think of something as risky
but notice that the whole notion of
risky
often refers to something that never
happens you might put 100 through a
poker machine each weekend and it might
be described as risky regardless of
whether you consistently win or not if
you win time and time again then the
word risky refers to the thing that
never happened assertions about
probabilities do not refer to the
physical world
either a thing happens or not saying
something is likely or probable to
happen is not about the real world where
things happen they don't probably happen
they happen and it's no good saying that
because something happens frequently
that this means it is probable because
exactly what is the probability
exactly equal to the frequency how do
you know is that an axiom
why do you say it's because it's
probably the case that frequencies equal
probabilities
if you toss a coin a thousand times and
it comes up heads 492 times entails 508
times that's a frequency so do we say
the probability of heads in that case is
492 out of 1000 for the next thousand
throws so why do we say it's one and two
is it just probably one and two because
it's approximately one and two why is
that the case
is it one and two because a priori by
definition before we do any experiments
in the world it must be one and two
because the coin has two sides and it's
perfectly fair how do we know it's
perfectly fair again
that's not science because our
experiment has just refuted the claim
that it was exactly one in two at all
the claim that heads has a probability
of one and two is a bad explanation
because it's almost never matched and we
have no good reason why it's not matched
except that we do
on physics actual physics but not on
probability theory the thing is that
frequencies in real life do not exactly
equal the supposed ideal probabilities
and any runner frequencies should not be
expected to be exactly replicated in
real life as david says so let me allow
him to speak in his own words
it's no good saying that they equal them
approximately
because they don't they only probably
equal them approximately similarly you
can't say that probability statements
are about what will happen in the long
run
no they aren't all you can do deduce
from them
are statements about what will probably
happen in the long run
but frequencies in an infinite sequence
of measurements of experiments
do equal the probabilities exactly and
this inspires yet another desperate
denial to the effect that the finite
sequences are approximations
to infinite ones
but nothing about a finite subsequence
of an infinite sequence
can possibly follow
from a statement about relative
frequencies in the infinite sequence
unless
the subsequence is a typical one so
probabilities only equal frequencies in
theory if we have an infinite sequence
but we don't have access to infinite
sequences of events like coin tosses and
any finite sequence is not equal to an
infinite sequence and we only ever have
finite sequences and how can we know any
finite sequence is a typical sequence we
can't
we can only say we probably have a
typical sequence so we're going in
circles
it could be that probability is merely
about ignorance
subjective ignorance it could all just
be about beliefs for example and a lack
of knowledge in the minds of people it
could be a very parochial set of
heuristics about how human minds work
that reaches into the real world in some
way okay in some way but what way
exactly what connects those claims about
our minds to what's going on out there
in the objective world what is the rule
apparently this is what bayesianism is
all about perhaps david lewis tried to
do this through his so-called principle
principle and the principle principle
from david lewis is that
rational agents conform their credences
to physical probabilities but that gives
no explanation as to why rational people
should or do believe it why should you
conform your credence to the physical
probability you may as well say why
rational people avoid black cats or
letters it's not physics there's no
explanation if we are rational then in
what way should i conform my credence to
a physical probability after all
probably winning is not the same as
winning so do i make the bet or not a
rational person is interested in what
really is the case or in what really is
going to be the case not what probably
is the case if i am told when buying a
house with wooden foundations that
there's probably not a termite
infestation that's not the same as being
told there's not a termite infestation
the rational thing to do is to employ a
termite expert to check if there is and
fix that problem
either there is or there isn't in this
area it's very rare for there to be
termites 99.9 of houses are free of
termites the risk of termites is
vanishingly small therefore you probably
don't have termites it really is like
well luck is on your side again that's
not rational what's rational is to check
and correct
but what if it's prohibitively expensive
to check isn't there then a reasonable
case to do a cost benefit analysis on
the probabilities on the fact that so
few people have termites
well is it rational to gamble that
depends if i have all my life savings
almost being thrown into a house no it's
not rational when one knows there exists
termites that could reduce your
investment to near zero and if checking
is prohibitively expensive then don't
buy ah but someone else took that gamble
and won turns out there were no termites
after all okay
some people win the lottery but it's
still not rational
if you use the poker machine the
gambling machine and you have a streak
of wins the fact that you won over and
again doesn't make what you did rational
we are interested in rationality and
reality here and anyways in real life in
the termite case it's not prohibitively
expensive and insofar as that is a
metaphor for other situations there will
be explanations that allow one to gain
the knowledge needed to find out what
the risk really is
as i will come to risk assessment is
about having good explanations or not
not about what will probably happen but
what is known to happen and what we know
about how to mitigate when the worst is
a possibility that hypothetical rational
actor in probability scenarios is not
the same as a real person
there are physical things and imaginary
things and they're not the same to
illuminate the way in which probability
is disconnected from reality consider
dividing statements about the world into
factual ones and probabilistic ones
and by comparison then magical ones or
thermatological ones as david has here
what makes the magical one worse than
the probabilistic one let's go through
the table here so a factual one about
poker a straight flush beats a full
house it's factual probabilistic drawing
to an inside straight is very risky
thermatological
this amulet will increase your luck
or we can just speak about things that
will happen x will happen probabilistic
x is likely or probable or magical x has
favorable omens x cannot happen
compared to x is unlikely or improbable
to happen
or magical x has unfavorable omens
we can see here that the probabilistic
and the magical are basically telling
you to do the same thing there is this
weird force that either can encourage
you to do a thing or dissuade you from
doing a thing
if we say factually x causes y
the probabilistic thing is that x is
correlated with y and a magical thing
might be x is an omen of y and last of
all
x has happened in the past more often
than y factual
the probabilistic claim is x will
typically happen and the magical claim
is x will happen if you truly believe so
it is strange that the column about
probability contains normative
statements statements about what you
should do which is strange for science
or physics because you can't get an
ought from and is
remember as david likes to say never
mind so much being unable to derive an
ought from it is you cannot derive an is
from an is either that the sun is hot
and produces light does not logically
entail that there is
fusion reactions going on at the core
that explanation had to be conjectured
and that then goes to explain why the
sun is hot and shines with light it's
quite the other way around
david goes on to summarize what a
stochastic physical theory is all about
what it consists of so if probability
purports to be a part of reality then
the theory of probability the stochastic
physical theory really consists of a
factual part of the stochastic theory
which asserts that some quantities x1 x2
etc have probabilities p1 p2 etc which
are physical in some sense so these
these things that may or may not happen
are physical in some way we don't know
how but if you the principal principle
then goes on to say that if you think
the probabilities are p1 p2 etc then
your credences your belief in these
things should be set to those
probabilities and last of all this
apparently helps you make decisions
because under suitable circumstances you
can treat the prospect of possible
outcomes with values x1 x2 etc and
credences c1 c2 etc as if you believed
that a single outcome with value c1 x1
plus c2 x2 etc is the expectation value
as if that was going to happen even
though we know it's possible it won't
and all of this leads us straight into
quantum theory because those other
non-realistic models of quantum theory
assert that the universe is stochastic
in some way that there is this
randomness going on in actual physical
reality it's wrong of course but how do
they do it let's explain how
these other versions of quantum theory
these
non-unitary so they're called versions
of quantum theory the versions of
quantum theory that deny most of
physical reality that deny the
multiverse how do they do it especially
given that the formalism of quantum
theory which we all agree on does not
explain in any way
why some of the possibilities are actual
and why some of them are never
actualized they remain only probable but
never happen how is that the case well
they use something called the born rule
and the born rule is if some observable
is measured
then the state vector of a quantum
system collapses to some particular
value an eigenvalue
with probability which is the square of
the amplitude of the wave function okay
in my words and much more roughly
speaking than what's on the screen there
my words are that quantum theory
describes observables physical
properties of a system like for example
the position of a particle is the one
that i like to use which is the most
basic one and that position of the
particle can be many valued
simultaneously and we like to say not
sharp
and it does this because it really isn't
it really isn't sharp it doesn't have a
single value as it does in classical
mechanics
but when you measure a thing
say the position you do get a sharp
value basically a single value a value
for whatever the observable is like that
position you know the electron the
particle is there at that position x
which is sharp but the bourne rule says
that each possible value has a
probability associated with it which is
the square of the amplitude of the wave
function so the probabilities are
physical they are part of physics on
this view because they are the squares
of how tall the amplitude of the wave
function is in the system and that is
the only way that probability ever came
into
realistic objective science or physics
all that assumes collapse of the wave
function and of course we know this does
not happen i say we know i mean those
who understand everettian quantum theory
or unitary quantum theory which is to
say the multiverse the many worlds
the way out of this is the decision
theoretic approach sometimes to the
bourne rule but that is kind of circular
and so
here we have a gambling machine
illustrating the decision theoretic
approach
and what it's saying is that roughly
speaking in one third of the multiverse
the value that appears on the machine is
going to be 2.7 and in the other two
thirds it's 5.9 let's not get into the
details it has something to do with that
squaring of the amplitude of the wave
function the decision theoretic approach
is about what a rational person should
do in a situation where the outcome for
them is unpredictable given that the
probabilities are not actual
what chiara says in her paper on
probability is that quote
the decision theoretic approach claims
to explain the appearance of stokassity
in unitary quantum theory without
invoking stochastic laws rather as
darwin's theory of evolution explains
the appearance of design in biological
adaptations without invoking a designer
end quote so things are not actually
random in the universe nothing actually
random happens it's just that the laws
are such that for any observer things
are unpredictable because they are not
able to have all the knowledge needed to
know which universe their consciousness
will be and after some measurement
whether a quantum physicist or
philosopher or whoever
speaks in terms of so-called actual
probabilities and actual randomness or
merely the appearance of randomness and
the use of rationality
makes no difference to what decision the
rational person ultimately makes it
would be the same it's just that only
one of them is speaking in realistic
terms actually speaking about what
actually happens in the real world now
at this point david does spend some time
on the technical details of quantum
theory in his talk but i'm not going to
i'm going to move over that very quickly
i will point the listener or viewer to
my series on the multiverse if
interested or the original talk itself
suffice it to say that alternatives to
unitary quantum theory are not exactly
parsimonious they require lots more
baggage and assumptions axioms if you
like to try and produce a stochastic or
probabilistic theory of quantum reality
now these axioms are not explanatory so
really should be ignored on that basis
they normally would be
we can reach the same conclusions
without ever assuming collapse happens
why assume collapse happens
go to the beginning of infinity look at
chapter 12 titled bad philosophy a
physicist's history of bad philosophy
and the reasons are
sociological bad philosophy
irrationalities all that sort of stuff
not wanting to take the theory literally
as a description of reality but realism
is parsimonious it is the simplest
explanation in the face of quantum
unpredictability and that's
unpredictability in the subjective sense
of course we can behave rationally we
can deploy reason we can speak of having
good explanations or not to inform our
choices so there are no stochastic
processes in nature according to quantum
theory unitary quantum theory the
multiverse what happens there happens
according to the laws of quantum theory
so there are no credences because there
is no need for credences credence as
being beliefs with numerical measures of
obeying the probability calculus and
just notice that idea of credence a
central part of bayesian epistemology is
once more entirely subjectivist it is
about what is happening in particular
minds this notion of belief it is not
about objective knowledge the solution
to problems out there which either do
worker solutions or do not that's an
objective criterion but rather again
belief belief shares some qualities with
hope or fear though the three are
different of course what they share is
that it's a private thought that
something's going to happen perhaps or
not or it could mean really truly
strongly think is true
whatever the case it is usually
accompanied by powerful feelings of a
kind the religious share it with the
superstitious who share it with the
conspiratorial who apparently share it
with the bayesians who try and quantify
it but knowledge is not primarily about
feelings
it is about what is the case and
representing what is the case regardless
of what people think
is the case or how they feel about what
is the case there is knowledge without a
knowing subject as popper explains and
what happens in physics happens
according to the laws of quantum theory
it does not say things probably happen
because things do not probably happen
they happen or they do not happen
and hence we've dispensed with
probability job done
but just lingering over the separation
between collapse theories and the
unitary quantum theory
we see that on the right hand side we
don't merely derive we have explained as
we do not have to introduce unexplained
postulates let's just return to cardano
for a moment
where in reality games of chance are
determined the outcomes of games of
chance genuine games of chance are
determined by quantum laws because the
laws of the universe are quantum they
govern everything and again they are not
literally described by the probability
calculus decisions made based on
probability theory in games of chance
therefore actually literally but then so
is most gambling of course literally
irrational they are made absent good
explanations
which can of course exist
betting on games of chance seeks to make
a prediction but how we are subjectively
uncertain and the probability calculus
does not hold anyway general decision
theory cannot take the probability
calculus literally as a description of
what is going on because
probability is literally false what is
general decision theory by the way well
it's just applying probability to
making certain decisions
whatever the case rationality means
being concerned with what we know and
how to error correct what we know
and allow all of that to inform our
decisions not being concerned about what
probably is the case there is no
probably again things happen they don't
probably happen and evolution does not
require probability either as david
explains in his talk because literal
randomness is not needed random or not
the theory works by selecting genes best
suited to an environment the theory
doesn't depend on true randomness the
essence is that the selection not the
mutations are the systematic part of the
theory chiara's paper on the constructor
theory of biology never even invokes
randomness none of this means the
mathematical formalism of quantum theory
is not sometimes useful of course it is
david is saying that the quantities call
probabilities in that formalism never
refer to any actual stochastic actual
random process in reality nor anything
in rational minds either in physics or
in minds thinking about physics as he
says can there be a stochastic process
in nature not as far as we know as far
as we know the universe is deterministic
not random quantum statistical mechanics
has entanglement and decoherence it
doesn't need probability experimental
error seems to contain probability one
of the first uses of probability after
the games of chance but random errors
what are called random errors are not
really random they can be reduced
without limits simply by repeating the
experiment in school or university
science classes these random errors are
things like well you know you measure
the length of something and then you
measure it again and the two
measurements are slightly different
because well you know people aren't
perfect and parallax is a thing and so
on or you might measure the mass of
something on an analytical balance in
chemistry class and one moment it's
1.342 grams and the next it's
1.344 grams and well who knows why but
maybe the wind blew or maybe water was
being absorbed so you have to repeat and
repeat again until you get a reliable
average or you know better what you're
doing and how to control the variables
systematic errors on the other hand are
all together different and they are
often methodological no amount of
repeating your measurements over and
again will eliminate them we cannot know
what causes them in many cases so it's
ironic they are called systematic
because no known system causes them in
most cases until sometime later when
they're corrected i say systematic
errors are methodological errors because
well let me give a very simple example
from school students might be asked to
get into groups and to measure the
height of one of them there might be
five students and another one whose
height is going to be measured tape
measures and rulers and lasers
everything is tried and deployed and
lots of repeats are made averages are
calculated with error bars produced and
eventually after half the lesson has
gone by for something as simple as
measuring the height of a student we
come up with a value this particular
student's height is 1.675
plus or minus
0.004 meters
so given the size of that error bar 0.00
meters
we have a height that is anywhere
between
1.679 meters at apparently they're
tallest and
1.671 metres at apparently they're
shortest the random error there gives
the limits and the naught point nought 4
gives us our precision it probably
arises because we've done many many
measurements and that's the average
ignoring any outliers and so on and so
forth but despite all of that we might
be entirely off inaccurate because of
systematic error
now at the moment no one might be aware
of what's gone wrong in the system they
might never but this sort of thing is
par for the course in science sometimes
you just cannot locate your error but
here i'll just tell you what it is the
student never took their shoes off
so really it's not the height of the
student that was ever found even though
that was the ostensive aim of the
experiment to find the height of the
student let's say what we ended up
finding was height of student plus
height of shoe sole or some such if you
don't know what's gone wrong
systematically which is usually what
happens with systematic errors what's
gone wrong with the procedure no amount
of repeating the experiment will fix
this all the fancy statistics in the
world and sigma confidence levels won't
help psychologists and astrophysicists
alike need to take note repeating the
experiment cannot make its conclusions
more likely true or probably true it's
about whether there's an error or not it
doesn't matter what a scientist believes
about a theory what credence they give
it either the theory is true or not
their beliefs about it are irrelevant
that subjectivist epistemology makes no
difference to actual reason actual
objective knowledge probability can be a
metaphor or a technique for an
approximation but it should be an
approximation to something so if it is
to inform decisions being made there
should be an explanation rooted in a
description of an actual physical world
where events happen not probably happen
it's right and proper to expunge
probability therefore and randomness
from the laws of physics to restore
actual realism and rationality to the
world
it's a simplification and a unification
and elimination of nonsense
and it's true the world is not
probabilistic for the umpteenth time
here things happen they don't probably
happen but instrumentalists will resist
what's the benefit of this expunging if
the formalism works anyway well as david
says fundamental falsehoods don't always
rear up and bite you you can believe in
a flat earth and it might never affect
your life and thinking but belief in a
flat earth theory could eventually
conflict with a theory for avoiding
asteroid strikes
then you've got a problem to put it
mildly so we should be concerned about
what is true
and how to best understand reality
similarly you might very well continue
to think probability theory is true or
randomness is real and so on you might
even be able to invent quantum computers
using this whole misconception but
because the born rule contains
misconceptions then you might not end up
developing successes to quantum theory
constructor theory for example is
incompatible with probability
if you assume that your garden is a
flatbed then you can use mathematics of
flat surfaces you don't need to say it's
an approximation to the flat earth
because it isn't there isn't a flat
earth for it to be approximate too
so too here
we don't assume that the probability
calculus is an approximation to
the underlying reality it's just some
mathematics that can be useful it's a
trick unpredictability can be modeled by
randomness sometimes but that does not
make the model correct it doesn't so
that's basically the content of david's
talk and i encourage everyone listening
to go to it and just to listen to david
speaking his own words about this stuff
this should give you a good grounding in
what he says what i've done here is
pepper a lot of david's remarks with my
own reflections and topspin as i say now
i just want to mention one other thing
briefly and that's about risk mitigation
as i say i've been asked about
probability a number of times
a subset within this is the idea of risk
mitigation
if we are saying something like
probability is a scam then how can we
quantify risk and mitigate it what is
the rational approach after all don't
actuarial scientists people working for
insurance firms and so on are they using
probability all the time they can't just
do away with it so if it's irrational
what's the rational thing to do well not
just actuarials everyone who might want
to invest in a company for example how
should we think about what is probably
going to turn a profit is that even a
rational way to think
where to build a home how to assess the
likelihood of failure for example the
mechanical failure of aircraft so in all
these cases rather than going through
them one by one i would just say that i
have a decision fork a risk decision
fork consider the fact that you either
have a good explanation or not any
circumstance
but let's talk risk let's specifically
talk natural disasters and what to do
about risk absent worrying about the
probability of the risk because that's a
fiction as we've already talked about we
want to talk facts not fictions
so here's my three pronged fork one
if you have a good explanation of the
risk its effects and where or when the
bad event might happen then prepare for
the bad event two
if you lack a good explanation of
whether and how a bad event is going to
happen then prepare for the worst when
you can
anything less is irresponsible and
basically gambling three
if you have a good explanation that the
bad event won't happen
only then
can you act as if you know it won't they
are your options and they are your only
options if someone takes probability
seriously and says the risk of a bad
event is 10 or even 90
it's no help whatsoever when it might be
your home or life on the line after all
in either case the worst might happen
tomorrow and effectively be consistent
with that so-called prediction and we
might very well ask where did this 10 or
90 number come from well it's come from
the frequencies at best it's come from
the frequencies by looking at
past situations similar to your own
ninety percent of people have
encountered the bad event or ten 10 of
the people have encountered the bad
event and so therefore this applies to
you as a typical representative of the
population and that's the best that
actuarial science can do and it's a
useful fiction but so long as we're not
regarding it as being true because after
all things happen or don't happen they
don't probably happen let's take a
specific example here in australia like
most other places on earth we are
plagued by natural disasters
still i'd prefer here in australia more
than almost anywhere else because we
tend not to get earthquakes basically
for the same reason we don't have
volcanoes luck of the continental draw
now it's not impossible to have
earthquakes but comparatively speaking
this continent is very very stable we
get storms but very rare are they
hurricane or typhoon like cyclones
they happen but to the north of the
country
what we do get are fires and floods i'll
concentrate on the floods because
they've been happening recently we live
on a continent that is astonishingly
flat so when it rains it can flood it
does flood it's predictable
yet people build homes towns and whole
cities on the flood plain they know the
flood will happen we have good
explanations of where floods happen
they know they happen frequently but
like any weather event not exactly when
in this situation you know the flood
will come so you have to be ready for it
that's the rational thing
we have good explanations of floods and
where they occur risk management says
that in this situation if you choose to
build in a place prone to floods you
should expect your home to be flooded so
you cannot expect to be insured except
for a lot of money and you should not
expect the taxpayer to compensate you
for choosing to live on a floodplain no
one will or should stop you building on
a floodplain it's cheap it's cheap for a
reason so there's risk and reward
but you can in theory build a house that
can survive the flood at no point do you
need to concern yourself with
it will probably flood it won't probably
flood it will flood period so here's
what my decision fork says to do the
first part is if you have a good
explanation of the risk its effects and
where or when the bad event might happen
then prepare for the bad event so in
this case
build your house on stilts let's say
lots of people in australia do that by
the way or build on one of the rare
hills or construct your own hill or just
construct the house such that when it
does flood it's not completely destroyed
or it's easy to repair the electrical
wiring is easy to get to or whatever
either that or prepare by not living in
the place prone to floods this is all
just logic and at no point do we need to
gamble we know what will happen floods
happen we just don't know exactly when
but again that's not probably we cannot
say probably next week or probably not
next week we don't know our best known
explanation of floods in australia also
prohibits for now
making precise predictions like that all
we can say is we don't know
which brings us to part two because
let's say you do buy the house but plan
on living there for only the next two
years maybe it won't flood in the next
two years we do not have a good
explanation of what floods will happen
in two years
we lack a good explanation so therefore
the second part of my fork would say if
you lack a good explanation of whether
and how a bad event is going to happen
then prepare for the worst when you can
anything less is irresponsible and
basically gambling so here we say we
don't know the flood will happen in two
years but the rational thing to do is to
prepare for it as if it will
as i say anything less is irresponsible
and amounts to relying on lucky charms
now you can avoid all of this flood talk
by living somewhere where we know it
does not flood and have good reasons why
it cannot flood for example some places
in australia are at an altitude of over
100 metres and on relatively steep
inclines near the ocean
if you really wanted to avoid a flood
then building on the side of a sloping
hill then no matter how hard the rain
comes down it flows right by you out
into the ocean and the ocean cannot
possibly fill up with rain you know
enough science to know that even if all
the ice in antarctica and greenland
melted you'd still be safe up above 100
meters in altitude because the maximum
sea level rise is only 72 meters and you
are up over 100 meters and that gives
you almost 30 meters of grace should
even a tsunami strike so in this case
with respect to flooding you're safe
which brings me to the third part of the
fork if you have a good explanation that
the bad event won't happen only then can
you act as if you know it won't
of course you could still be hit by an
asteroid but in this case we're in the
situation of simply lacking good
explanation sufficient knowledge and
wealth
now in terms of large asteroids that
might wipe out humanity well they are of
a particular size such that our
telescopes and present technology can
detect them in theory we'd have the
wealth the capacity to deflect them but
house destroying asteroids we're not
quite there yet but
they're infrequent enough that it's a
reasonable heuristic not to worry about
the risk any more than visiting
australia and being bit by a funnel web
spider in a very similar way when it
comes to money the same principles hold
no one rational should want to invest in
a company that will probably make money
because no company probably makes money
companies make money or they lose money
of course some investors might want more
insight than this they might want to
know how much money will be made before
they invest
there are many people better place than
i
to guide the rational investor through
this maze but one thing that is clear is
that probabilities are not part of the
picture there is no way to know
beforehand
what the future holds with any precision
because the relevant factors depend upon
human creativity knowing how the product
yet to be produced at scale works in the
market all that knowledge is yet to be
created and more the team of people
coming together in that company to make
things work they are yet to get to know
each other under the conditions of
success or temporary failure and so on
so much knowledge is yet to be created
and knowledge creation by its very
nature is as we like to say inherently
unpredictable
so these kinds of predictions are not
possible but here is what is possible
you can either have some relevant and
specific knowledge or you can lack it
if you are an investor or an employee or
a founder or even the sole owner for
that matter you can know the product
well
or not
you don't say i've probably got a good
understanding of what we are selling you
either do or you don't and the same goes
for your employees for the business
this is not to say you need to know
about the intricate details of a person
to know they are competent
you need to know that they have the
relevant knowledge to get the job done
so you either have that knowledge or not
it's again not a matter of probably
having that knowledge it's black and
white in other words to keep this part
relatively brief because i only want to
make very broad brush strokes here you
either have a good explanation of why
the business should succeed
or not
if you lack a good explanation of what
the business is what the market is like
and what the people working in that
business are like
and you invest anyway well you're
gambling you might as well be putting
the money through the casino where you
only have a partial understanding of how
the gaming machines work or exactly what
the mathematics of roulette happens to
be but if you do have good explanations
you either do or don't invest in the
case of the casino you know the whole
thing is rigged on the side of the
casino every game in the long run is set
so that the odds are in the favor of the
casino so it's not rational to play
in order to make money you might play
because you're just having fun with your
friends and so on but that's different
it's still irrational as a means of
making money it might be rational as a
means of having fun so long as you
expect you're going to lose your money
in the long run and so too with
investing there might be a case to be
made for having fun in the market for
really taking the long shot bet
the young up-and-coming chemistry
graduate comes to you with a plan for
waterproof transparent paint that
generates photovoltaic electricity solar
power you don't have the technical
proficiency or time to go into the
details you don't have a good
explanation but she seems genuine she
checks out online now she could be the
next mari curie or she could be the next
elizabeth holmes running a theronos type
scam
but you're wealthy and she's only asking
two hundred thousand dollars and if
she's correct every building on earth
can be painted with transparent
photovoltaic paint which during the day
can power all of the lights in that
building well maybe that qualifies as
fun you won't really miss the 200 000
and there's something to be said for
this particular innovator appearing to
not want to damage their reputation but
it's still a gamble you might just
change the world of technology and
engineering or not
now that case aside simply having fun in
the stock market rather than focusing
directly on getting a good return on
making money in all other cases
you want to have
knowledge
knowledge of what actually is
not because it can possibly guarantee
what will be when it comes to success or
failure in business but because
knowledge is not a matter of
probabilities if you have a good
explanation for the viability of a
product the hole in the market lack of
present competitors and knowledge of the
skill and competence of the team then
you do not need to be told by anyone
else that your return on investment is
probably going to be fifty percent over
the next five years well probably two
hundred percent or any other number for
that matter the probably part the
probability does not matter because
there is no probably
something is going to happen businesses
often fail but you
personally know business or at least you
should be if you're asking this question
and so you have the knowledge of what to
look for again none of this possibly
guarantees you won't fail experts fail
all the time you are still fallible
you've taken all possible measures to
avoid disasters you can foresee you've
not effectively built the home on a
flood plain but in business the
equivalent of the asteroid or some other
unforeseen natural disaster can still
occur but at no point have you needed to
comfort yourself with the hope of good
omens or protecting yourself with lucky
charms or the thought i should probably
be okay the business is probably a good
investment because the people are
probably good at what they're doing
no there are no certainties in life and
in human affairs as much as global and
cosmological events what happens rather
often is inherently unpredictable and in
the human world this is because what
happens depends on
human choices which themselves depend on
human creativity what people know and
what knowledge they create
things happen
they don't probably happen
knowledge is about good explanations of
the world and can be instantiated in
things other than human minds
it's not about beliefs and feelings so
bayesianism is wrong and rationality
cannot possibly be about considerations
of things that probably happen
the idea that it is resembles a sort of
mysticism contemplation of imaginary
worlds the worlds of the probable but
quantum theory tells us what can happen
what does happen and constructor theory
is revealing as science of the possible
and impossible and therefore how we can
transform the world
it's not that our decisions will
probably change the world they will or
they won't
we'll either know how or we won't we'll
either have the wealth to do what we
want
or we won't there's no probably about it
and that doesn't mean i'll likely end
the podcast here instead i will
see you next time